CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to apex-mutation-testing

We encourage the developer community to contribute to this repository. This guide has instructions to install, build, test and contribute to the framework.

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Git Workflow](#git-workflow)

## Requirements

- [Node](https://nodejs.org/) >= 18.6.0
- [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) >= 10.9.0

## Installation

### 1) Download the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:scolladon/apex-mutation-testing.git
```

### 2) Install Dependencies

This will install all the tools needed to contribute

```bash
npm install
```

### 3) Build application

```bash
npm pack
```

Rebuild every time you made a change in the source and you need to test locally

## Testing

### Unit Testing sgd

When developing, use [jest](https://jestjs.io/en/) unit testing to provide test coverage for new functionality. To run the jest tests use the following command from the root directory:

```bash
# just run test
npm run test:unit
```

To execute a particular test, use the following command:

```bash
npm run test:unit -- <path_to_test>

```

### NUT Testing sgd

When developing, use mocha testing to provide NUT functional test. To run the mocha tests use the following command from the root directory:

```bash
# run test
npm run test:nut
```

### E2E Testing

WIP

## Editor Configurations

Configure your editor to use our lint and code style rules.

### Code formatting

[Biome](https://biomejs.dev/) Format, lint, and more in a fraction of a second.

### Code linting

[Biome](https://biomejs.dev/) Format, lint, and more in a fraction of a second.

### Commit linting

This repository uses [Commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint) to check our commit convention.
Pre-commit git hook using husky and pull request check both the commit convention for each commit in a branch.

You can use an interactive command line to help you create supported commit message

```bash
npm run commit
```

### PR linting

When a PR is ready for merge we use the PR name to create the squash and merge commit message.
We use the commit convention to auto-generate the content and the type of each release
It needs to follow our commit lint convention and it will be check at the PR level

## Git Workflow

The process of submitting a pull request is straightforward and
generally follows the same pattern each time:

1. [Fork the repo](#fork-the-repo)
2. [Create a feature branch](#create-a-feature-branch)
3. [Make your changes](#make-your-changes)
4. [Rebase](#rebase)
5. [Check your submission](#check-your-submission)
6. [Create a pull request](#create-a-pull-request)
7. [Update the pull request](#update-the-pull-request)

### Fork the repo

[Fork](https://help.github.com/en/articles/fork-a-repo) the [scolladon/apex-mutation-testing](https://github.com/scolladon/apex-mutation-testing) repo. Clone your fork in your local workspace and [configure](https://help.github.com/en/articles/configuring-a-remote-for-a-fork) your remote repository settings.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<YOUR-USERNAME>/apex-mutation-testing.git
cd apex-mutation-testing
git remote add upstream git@github.com:scolladon/apex-mutation-testing.git
```

### Create a feature branch

```bash
git checkout main
git pull origin main
git checkout -b feature/<name-of-the-feature>
```

### Make your changes

Change the files, build, test, lint and commit your code using the following command:

```bash
git add <path/to/file/to/commit>
git commit ...
git push origin feature/<name-of-the-feature>
```

Commit your changes using a descriptive commit message

The above commands will commit the files into your feature branch. You can keep
pushing new changes into the same branch until you are ready to create a pull
request.

### Rebase

Sometimes your feature branch will get stale on the main branch,
and it will must a rebase. Do not use the github UI rebase to keep your commits signed. The following steps can help:

```bash
git checkout main
git pull upstream main
git checkout feature/<name-of-the-feature>
git rebase upstream/main
```

_note: If no conflicts arise, these commands will apply your changes on top of the main branch. Resolve any conflicts._

### Check your submission

#### Lint your changes

```bash
npm run lint
```

The above command may display lint issues not related to your changes.
The recommended way to avoid lint issues is to [configure your
editor](https://biomejs.dev/guides/integrate-in-vcs/) to warn you in real time as you edit the file.

the plugin lint all those things :

- typescript files
- folder structure
- plugin parameters
- plugin output
- dependencies
- dead code / configuration

Fixing all existing lint issues is a tedious task so please pitch in by fixing
the ones related to the files you make changes to!

#### Run tests

Test your change by running the unit tests and integration tests. Instructions [here](#testing).

### Create a pull request

If you've never created a pull request before, follow [these
instructions](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/). Pull request samples [here](https://github.com/scolladon/sfdx-git-delta/pulls)

### Update the pull request

```bash
git fetch origin
git rebase origin/${base_branch}

# Then force push it
git push origin ${feature_branch} --force-with-lease
```

_note: If your pull request needs more changes, keep working on your feature branch as described above._

CI validates prettifying, linting and tests

### Collaborate on the pull request

We use [Conventional Comments](https://conventionalcomments.org/) to ensure every comment expresses the intention and is easy to understand.
Pull Request comments are not enforced, it is more a way to help the reviewers and contributors to collaborate on the pull request.

## CLI parameters convention

The plugins uses [sf cli parameters convention](https://github.com/salesforcecli/cli/wiki/Design-Guidelines-Flags) to define parameters for the CLI.

## Testing the plugin from a pull request

To test SGD as a Salesforce CLI plugin from a pending pull request:

1. locate the comment with the beta version published in the pull request
2. install the beta version `sf plugins install apex-mutation-testing@<beta-channel>`
3. test the plugin!

## How to modify npm tags

Execute the npm script `npm run devops:move-tag -- <version> <tag>`
Ex: `npm run devops:move-tag -- 1.0.0 stable`

Use it to move tags to a version, for example to move `stable` and `latest` tags to a new version.
Or to downgrade `latest-rc` tag to a previous version.

## How to cleanup dev tags

Execute the npm script `npm run devops:cleanup-tag -- <dev-tag>`
Ex: `npm run devops:cleanup-tag -- dev-101`

It will remove the dev tag from npm registry and deprecate all versions related to this dev tag.

Commit message:

chore(build): add script to cleanup all dev tags at once

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to apex-mutation-testing

We encourage the developer community to contribute to this repository. This guide has instructions to install, build, test and contribute to the framework.

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Git Workflow](#git-workflow)

## Requirements

- [Node](https://nodejs.org/) >= 18.6.0
- [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/) >= 10.9.0

## Installation

### 1) Download the repository

```bash
git clone git@github.com:scolladon/apex-mutation-testing.git
```

### 2) Install Dependencies

This will install all the tools needed to contribute

```bash
npm install
```

### 3) Build application

```bash
npm pack
```

Rebuild every time you made a change in the source and you need to test locally

## Testing

### Unit Testing sgd

When developing, use [jest](https://jestjs.io/en/) unit testing to provide test coverage for new functionality. To run the jest tests use the following command from the root directory:

```bash
# just run test
npm run test:unit
```

To execute a particular test, use the following command:

```bash
npm run test:unit -- <path_to_test>

```

### NUT Testing sgd

When developing, use mocha testing to provide NUT functional test. To run the mocha tests use the following command from the root directory:

```bash
# run test
npm run test:nut
```

### E2E Testing

WIP

## Editor Configurations

Configure your editor to use our lint and code style rules.

### Code formatting

[Biome](https://biomejs.dev/) Format, lint, and more in a fraction of a second.

### Code linting

[Biome](https://biomejs.dev/) Format, lint, and more in a fraction of a second.

### Commit linting

This repository uses [Commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint) to check our commit convention.
Pre-commit git hook using husky and pull request check both the commit convention for each commit in a branch.

You can use an interactive command line to help you create supported commit message

```bash
npm run commit
```

### PR linting

When a PR is ready for merge we use the PR name to create the squash and merge commit message.
We use the commit convention to auto-generate the content and the type of each release
It needs to follow our commit lint convention and it will be check at the PR level

## Git Workflow

The process of submitting a pull request is straightforward and
generally follows the same pattern each time:

1. [Fork the repo](#fork-the-repo)
2. [Create a feature branch](#create-a-feature-branch)
3. [Make your changes](#make-your-changes)
4. [Rebase](#rebase)
5. [Check your submission](#check-your-submission)
6. [Create a pull request](#create-a-pull-request)
7. [Update the pull request](#update-the-pull-request)

### Fork the repo

[Fork](https://help.github.com/en/articles/fork-a-repo) the [scolladon/apex-mutation-testing](https://github.com/scolladon/apex-mutation-testing) repo. Clone your fork in your local workspace and [configure](https://help.github.com/en/articles/configuring-a-remote-for-a-fork) your remote repository settings.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:<YOUR-USERNAME>/apex-mutation-testing.git
cd apex-mutation-testing
git remote add upstream git@github.com:scolladon/apex-mutation-testing.git
```

### Create a feature branch

```bash
git checkout main
git pull origin main
git checkout -b feature/<name-of-the-feature>
```

### Make your changes

Change the files, build, test, lint and commit your code using the following command:

```bash
git add <path/to/file/to/commit>
git commit ...
git push origin feature/<name-of-the-feature>
```

Commit your changes using a descriptive commit message

The above commands will commit the files into your feature branch. You can keep
pushing new changes into the same branch until you are ready to create a pull
request.

### Rebase

Sometimes your feature branch will get stale on the main branch,
and it will must a rebase. Do not use the github UI rebase to keep your commits signed. The following steps can help:

```bash
git checkout main
git pull upstream main
git checkout feature/<name-of-the-feature>
git rebase upstream/main
```

_note: If no conflicts arise, these commands will apply your changes on top of the main branch. Resolve any conflicts._

### Check your submission

#### Lint your changes

```bash
npm run lint
```

The above command may display lint issues not related to your changes.
The recommended way to avoid lint issues is to [configure your
editor](https://biomejs.dev/guides/integrate-in-vcs/) to warn you in real time as you edit the file.

the plugin lint all those things :

- typescript files
- folder structure
- plugin parameters
- plugin output
- dependencies
- dead code / configuration

Fixing all existing lint issues is a tedious task so please pitch in by fixing
the ones related to the files you make changes to!

#### Run tests

Test your change by running the unit tests and integration tests. Instructions [here](#testing).

### Create a pull request

If you've never created a pull request before, follow [these
instructions](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-pull-request/). Pull request samples [here](https://github.com/scolladon/sfdx-git-delta/pulls)

### Update the pull request

```bash
git fetch origin
git rebase origin/${base_branch}

# Then force push it
git push origin ${feature_branch} --force-with-lease
```

_note: If your pull request needs more changes, keep working on your feature branch as described above._

CI validates prettifying, linting and tests

### Collaborate on the pull request

We use [Conventional Comments](https://conventionalcomments.org/) to ensure every comment expresses the intention and is easy to understand.
Pull Request comments are not enforced, it is more a way to help the reviewers and contributors to collaborate on the pull request.

## CLI parameters convention

The plugins uses [sf cli parameters convention](https://github.com/salesforcecli/cli/wiki/Design-Guidelines-Flags) to define parameters for the CLI.

## Testing the plugin from a pull request

To test SGD as a Salesforce CLI plugin from a pending pull request:

1. locate the comment with the beta version published in the pull request
2. install the beta version `sf plugins install apex-mutation-testing@<beta-channel>`
3. test the plugin!

## How to modify npm tags

Execute the npm script `npm run devops:move-tag -- <version> <tag>`
Ex: `npm run devops:move-tag -- 1.0.0 stable`

Use it to move tags to a version, for example to move `stable` and `latest` tags to a new version.
Or to downgrade `latest-rc` tag to a previous version.

## How to cleanup dev tags

Execute the npm script `npm run devops:cleanup:dev-tag -- <dev-tag> <otp>` to clean up a single dev tag.
Ex: `npm run devops:cleanup:dev-tag -- dev-101 123456`

To clean up **all** dev tags at once: `npm run devops:cleanup:dev-tag:all -- <otp>`

Both will deprecate all versions related to the dev tag(s) and remove the dist-tag(s) from the npm registry.
